numerical sorcery, separate its constituents, merge the constituents from two quite different pebbles and, in fact, transform black pebbles into gold pebbles, and vice versa.

The signal processing power of the computer means that sound itself can now be manipulated. Like the chemist, we can take apart what were once the raw materials of music, reconstitute them, or transform them into new and undreamt of musical materials. Sound becomes a fluid and entirely malleable medium, not a carefully honed collection of givens. Sculpture and chemistry, rather than language or finite mathematics, become appropriate metaphors for what a composer might do, although mathematical and physical principals will still enter strongly into the design of both musical tools and musical structures.

The precision of computer signal processing means, furthermore, that previously evanescent and uncontainable features of sounds may be analysed, understood, transferred and transformed in rigorously definable ways. A minute audible feature of a particular sound can be magnified by time-stretching or brought into focus by cyclic repetition (as in the works of Steve Reich). The evolving spectrum of a complex sonic event can be pared away until only a few of the constituent partials remain, transforming something that was perhaps coarse and jagged, into something aetherial (spectral tracing : see Chapter 3). We may exaggerate or contradict - in a precise manner - the energy (loudness) trajectory (or envelope) of a sound, enhancing or contradicting its gestural propensities, and we can pass between these "states of being" of the sound with complete fluidity, tracing out an audible path of musical connections - a basis for musical form- building.

This shift in emphasis is as radical as is possible - from a finite set of carefully chosen archetypal properties governed by traditional "architectural" principles, to a continuum of unique sound events and the possibility to stretch, mould and transform this continuum in any way we choose, to build new worlds of musical connectedness. To get any further in this universe, we need to understand the properties of the "sonic matter" with which we must deal.

THE REPRESENTATION OF SOUND - PHYSICAL & NUMERICAL ANALOGUES

To understand how this radical shift is possible, we must understand both the nature of sound, and how it can now be physically represented. Fundamentally sound is a pressure wave travelling through the air. Just as we may observed the ripples spreading outwards from a stone thrown into still water, when we speak similar ripples travel through the air to the ears of listeners. And as with all wave motion, it is the pattern of disturbance which moves forward, rather than the water or air itself. Each pocket of air (or water) may be envisaged as vibrating about its current position and passing on that vibration to the pocket next to it. This is the fundamental difference between the motion of sound in air and the motion of the wind where the air molecules move en masse in one direction. It also explains how sound can travel very much faster than the most ferocious hurricane.

Sound waves in air differ from the ripples on the surface of a pond in another way. The ripples on a pond (or waves on the ocean) disturb the surface at right angles (up and down) to the direction of motion of that wave (forward). These are therefore known as lateral waves. In a sound wave, the air is alternatively compressed and rarefied in the same direction as the direction of motion (See Diagram 1).

However, we can represent the air wave as a graph of pressure against time. In such a graph we represent pressure on the vertical axis and time on the horizontal axis. So our representation ends up looking just like a lateral wave! (See Diagram 1).
<page>13</page>
