sounds corresponding to the various chapters in the book. In fact, sounds can be grouped into different classes, with fuzzy boundaries, but most sounds have most of the properties that we will discuss. As compositional tools may affect two or more perceptual aspects of a sound, as we go through the book it will be necessary to refer more than once to many compositional processes as we examine their effects from different perceptual perspectives.

UNIQUENESS AND MALLEABILITY : FROM ARCHITECTURE TO CHEMISTRY

To deal with this change of orientation, our principal metaphor for musical composition must change from one of architecture to one of chemistry.

In the past, composers were provided, by the history of instrument technology, performance practice and the formalities of notational conventions (including theoretical models relating notatables like pitch and duration) with a pool of sound resources from which musical "buildings" could be constructed.  Composition through traditional instruments binds together as a class large groups of sounds and evolving-shapes-of-sounds (morphologies) by collecting acceptable sound types together as an "instrument" e.g. a set of struck metal strings (piano), a set of tuned gongs (gamelan), and uniting this with a tradition of performance practice. The internal shapes (morphologies) of sound events remain mainly in the domain of performance practice and are not often subtly accessed through notation conventions. Most importantly however, apart from the field of percussion, the overwhelming dominance of pitch as a defining parameter in music focuses interest on sound classes with relatively stable spectral and frequency characteristics.

We might imagine an endless beach upon which are scattered innumerable unique pebbles. The previous task of the instrument builder was to seek out all those pebbles that were completely black to make one instrument, all those that were completely gold to make a second instrument, and so on. The composer then becomes an expert in constructing intricate buildings in which every pebble is of a definable colour. As the Twentieth Century has progressed and the possibilities of conventional instruments have been explored to their limit we have learned to recognise various shades of grey and gilt to make out architecture ever more elaborate.

Sound recording, however, opens up the possibility that any pebble on the beach might be usable - those that are black with gold streaks, those that are multi-coloured. Our classification categories are overburdened and our original task seems to become overwhelmed. We need a new perspective to understand this new world.

In sonic terms. not only sounds of indeterminate pitch (like unpitched percussion, definable portamenti, or inharmonic spectra) but those of unstable, or rapidly varying spectra (the grating gate, the human speech-stream) must be accepted into the compositional universe. Most sounds simply do not fall into the neat categories provided by a pitched-instruments oriented conception of musical architecture. As most traditional building plans used pitch (and duration) as their primary ordering principles, working these newly available materials is immediately problematic. A complete reorientation of musical thought is required - together with the power provided by computers - to enable us to encompass this new world of possibilities.

We may imagine a new personality combing the beach of sonic possibilities, not someone who selects, rejects, classifies and measures the acceptable, but a chemist who can take any pebble and by
<page>12</page>
