
Except for x2 time-stretching, when working on musically interesting sound sources, waveset
repetition is more useful as a special sound transformation procedure. Successive applications of such
x2 stretching does not significantly reduce the bead-streaming effect in long time dilations.
SPECTRAL TIME-STRETCHING
A sustained sound with stable spectrum and no distinctive onset characteristics may be analysed to
produce a (windowed) frequency-domain representation. We can then resynthesize the sound, using
each window to generate a longer duration (phase vocoder). The resultant sound appears longer but
retains its pitch and spectral characteristics. We may notice an extension of the initial rise time and
final decay time but in this case these may well not be perceptually crucial. Of all the techniques so far
discussed, this is by far the best for pure time-stretching and works well up to about x8 time
stretching. (Sound example 11.9).
Beyond this,however, it too becomes less satisfactory as a pure time-stretching procedure. The
original window size for the analysis is chosen to be in the time-domain so brief that the human ear
perceives the small change from window to window (in fact a "step") as a smooth continuous transition.
Once we do too long a resynthesis from individual windows, e.g. a x64 time-stretch, the spectrum of
each window is sustained long enough for us to become aware of the joins. The continuity of the
original source is not reconstructed.
One way around this limitation is to stretch the source x8, synthesize the result, reanalyse and
time-stretch by x8 once again. However, a more satisfactory approach is to interpolate between the
existing windows to create new windows intermediate in channel-frequency and channel-loudness
values between the original windows but spaced at the original window time-interval. (spectral
time-stretching). The procedure ensures a perceptually continuous result even at x64 time stretch.
(Sound example 11.10).
However, even in this case, spectral transformations may arise. In particular, a sound with a rapidly
changing spectrum, originally perceived as noise, will be sufficiently slowed for us to hear out the
spectral motion involved. In general we will hear a resulting sound with a gliding inharmonic
("metallic") spectrum in place of our source noise, at very great time- stretching factors. (Sound
example 11.11).
Using time-variable spectral time-stretching (spectral time-warping), we can use this effect to
produce spectrally diverse variants of a source, zooming in to a maximal time-stretch at a particular
point in a source, will produce a particular inharmonic artefact in the goal sound. Zooming in to a
different point in the source will produce a different inharmonic artefact in the new goal sound. We can
thus produce a collection of related musical events deriving from the same source (provided enough of
the resulting signals are elsewhere similar to each other). (Sound example 11.12).
The ultimate extension of this process is spectral freezing, where the frequencies or loudnesses of the
spectral components in a particular window are retained through the ensuing windows. This
compositional tool is discussed in Chapter 3.
If we have a sound with marked (grain time-frame) onset characteristics, e.g. an attack-dispersion
sound (piano, bell, pizz), even our interpolated spectral time-stretch over a long stretch, will radically
89