The practical implications of this are immense for the composer. In the past I might spend many days working from an original sound source subjecting it to many processes before arriving at a satisfactory result. As a record of this process (as well as a safeguard against losing my hard-won final product) I would keep copious notes and copies of many of the intermediate sounds, to make reconstruction (or variation) of the final sound possible. Today, I store only the source and a brief so-called "batch-file".  The text in the batch-file, if activated, will automatically run all the programs necessary to create the goal sound. It can also be copied and modified to produce whatever variants are required.

An illuminating manuscript indeed!

SOUND TRANSFORMATION SCIENCE OR ART ?

In this book we will refer to sounds as sound-materials or sound-sources and to the process of changing them as transformations or sound-transformations The tools which effect changes will be described as musical instruments or musical tools. From an artistic point of view it is important to stress the continuity of this work to past musical craft. The musical world is generally conservative and denizens of this community can be quick to dismiss the "new-fangled" as unmusical or artistically inappropriate. However, we would stress that this is a book by, and for, musicians.

Nevertheless, scientific readers will be more familiar with the terms signal, signal processing and computer program or algorithm. In many respects, what we will be discussing is signal processing as it applies to sound signals. However, the motivation of our discussion is somewhat different from that of the scientific or technological study of signals. In analysing and transforming signals for scientific purposes, we normally have some distinct goal in mind - an accurate representation of a given sequence, extraction of data in the frequency domain, the removal of noise and the enhancement of the signal "image" - and we may test the result of our process against the desired outcome and hence assess the validity of our procedure.

In some cases, musicians share these goals. Precise analysis of sounds, extraction of time-varying information in the frequency domain (see Appendix p3), sound clarification or noise reduction, are all of great importance to the sonic composer. But beyond this, the question that a composer asks is, is this process aesthetically interesting? - does the sound resulting from the process relate perceptually and in a musically useful manner to the sound we began with? What we are searching for is a way to transform sound material to give resulting sounds which are clearly close relatives of the source, but also clearly different. Ideally we require a way to "measure" or order these degrees of difference allowing us to articulate the space of sound possibilities in a structured and meaningful way.

Beyond this, there are no intrinsic restrictions on what we do. In particular, the goal of the process we set in motion may not be known or even (with complex signals) easily predictable beforehand. In fact, as musicians, we do not need to "know" completely what we are doing (!!). The success of our efforts will be judged by what we hear. For example, a technological or scientific task may involve the design of a highly specific filter to achieve a particular result. A musician, however, is more likely to require an extremely flexible (band-variable, Q-variable, time-variable: Appendix p8) filter in order to explore its effects on sound materials. He/she may not know beforehand exactly what is being searched for when it is used, apart from a useful aesthetic transformation of the original source. What this means in practice may only emerge in the course of the exploration.
<page>4</page>
