
The difficulties here might be compared with those in the process of in-betweening in animation. Here
the directing artist draws key frames for the film, and assistants (or computers) do the various
in-between drawings such that, when all are combined frame-by-frame on the film, realistic movement
will be created. In-betweening may not be as skilful an occupation as originating the key frames but it
is by no means elementary. Simple point-to-point linear interpolation will, in general, not work.
INTERLEAVING AND TEXTURAL SUBSTITUTION
A different approach to this problem of static interpolation is to, in some sense, interleave the data from
our two sounds. One way to do this is to interleave analysis windows obtained from the spectral
analysis of two sounds.
When we produce a spectral analysis of a time-varying sound, we divide the sound into tiny
time-slices, or windows, and analyse the spectrum in each window (using e.g. the fast fourier
transform, see Appendix pp2-3, and Chapter 1) in order to follow the temporal evolution of the
spectrum. This procedure is the basis of the phase vocoder (see Appendix).
Having produced such an analysis of our two different sounds we may interleave alternate windows
from each sound, preserving the original time-frame, or simply interleave windows as they are, creating
a goal sound as long as the sum of the original sounds' lengths (see Appendix). This procedure can
result in a kind of closely welded 'mix', if not exactly a fusion of aural percept. We may also choose to
interleave pairs (or larger groups) of windows. With a sufficiently large grouping of windows, this will,
of course, produce a rapid regular oscillation between the two source sounds. (Sound example 12.6).
A similar percept can, however, be more easily achieved through brassage where we also have control
over the segment size and are not therefore tied to regular oscillations. Two or more sources can be
brassaged together (multi-source brassage) with control of segment size, search range, pitch shift,
spatialisation of segments etc, just as in single source brassage. This approach perhaps works best in
producing a process-focussed transformation (see Chapter 1) (e.g. granulated or pitch-spread) in
which the two (or more) sources 'peer through' the distorting grill of the process simultaneously. The
process's artefact grill disguises the lack of true fusion of the sources - both are an integral part of the
resulting 'mince'. (Sound example 12.7).
We can go one step further and attempt to integrate the wave-cycles, or wavesets, of the two sounds.
Interleaving wavecycles or wavesets will produce spectrally unpredictable sidebands; two interleaved
sinewaves of different wavelengths will produce a sideband whose wavelength is the sum of the
originals, but with complex signals the process is likely to result in radical mutual distortion. This
becomes a mutual transformation process rather than a true interpolation (waveset interleaving).
(Sound example 12.8).
Similarly, we may impose the waveset (or wavecycle) shape of one sound on the waveset (or
wavecycle) length of the other. With simple sources, e.g. square wave to sine wave, this will force the
pitch of the latter on the spectrum of the former. With complex sources, using wavesets, the results are
once again complex and perceptually unpredictable. Again, we have mutual transformation, but not true
interpolation (waveset transfer). (Sound example 12.9).
99