<page id=52>
process also can change a rapid continuation into something in a phrase time-frame, for example, formant-gliding consonants ("w", "y" in English) become slow formant transformations ("oo" "uh and "i" "uh"). Conversely, a continuation structure can be locked into the indivisible qualitative character of a grain, through extreme time-contraction. (Sound example 5.13).

Continuation may also be generated through reverberation. This principle is used in many acoustic instruments where a sound box allows the energy from an instantaneous sound-event to be reflected around a space and hence sustained. Reverberation will extend any momentarily stable pitch and spectral properties in a short event. It may also be combined with filtering to sustain specific pitches or spectral bands. It provides a new dispersal continuation for the sound. (Sound example 5.14).

Natural reverberation is heard when (sufficiently loud) sounds are played in rooms or enclosures of any kind, except where the reverberation has been designed out, as in an anechoic chamber. Natural reverberation is particularly noticeable in old stone buildings (e.g. churches) or tiled spaces like bathrooms or swimming pool enclosures. Reverberation in fact results from various delayed (due to travelling in indirect paths to the ear, by bouncing off walls or other surfaces) and spectrally altered (due to the reflection process taking place on different physical types of surface) versions of the sound being mixed with the direct sound as it reaches the ear. Such processes can be electronically mimicked.  The electronic mimicry has the added advantage that we can specify the dimensions of unlikely or impossible spaces (e.g. infinite reverberation from an infinitely long' hall. the inside of a biscuit tin for an orchestra etc.) There is thus an enormous variety of possibilities for creating sound continuation through reverberation.

Reverberation can be used to add the ambience of a particular space to any kind of sound. In this case we are playing with the illusion of the physical nature of the acoustic space itself, the generalised continuation properties of our whole sound set. But it can also be used in a specific way to enlarge or alter the nature of the individual sound events, extending (elements of) the spectrum in time.

Reverberation cannot, however, by itself, extend any undulatory or forced continuation properties of a sound. On the contrary it will blur these. Moving pitch will be extended as a pitch band, loudness variations will simply be averaged in the new dispersal. We can, of course, post-hoc, add undulatory or forced continuation properties (vibrato, tremolo, enveloping) to a reverberation extended sound. These will in fact help to unify the percept initiator-reverberator as a single sound-event. The reverberation part of the sound will appear to be part of the sound production itself, rather than an aspect of a sound box or characteristic of a room. (Sound example 5.15).

Initiator-reverberator models have in fact been used recently to build synthesis models of acoustic instruments from vibraphones, where the separation might seem natural, to Tubas.

CONSTRUCTED CONTINUATION : ZIGZAGGING & BRASSAGE

Continuation can be generated by the process of zigzagging. Here, the sound is read in a forward-backward-forward etc sequence, each reversal-read starting at the point where the preceding read ended. The reversal points may be specified to be anywhere in the sound. Provided we start the whole process at the sound's beginning and end it at its end, the sound will appear to be artificially extended. In the simplest case, the sound may oscillate between two fixed times in the middle of the sound until told to proceed to the end. This "alternate looping" technique was used in early commercial
</page>
