This open-ended approach applies equally to the design of musical instruments (signal processing programs) themselves. In this case, however, it clearly helps to have a modicum of acoustic knowledge. An arbitrary, number-crunching program will produce an arbitrary result - like the old adage of trying to write a play by letting a chimpanzee stab away at a typewriter in the hope that a masterpiece will emerge.

So scientists be forewarned! We may embark on signal-processing procedures which will appear bizarre to the scientifically sophisticated, procedures that give relatively unpredictable results, or that are heavily dependent on the unique properties of the particular signals to which they are applied. The question we must ask as musicians however is not, are these procedures scientifically valid, or even predictable, but rather, do they produce aesthetically useful results on at least some types of sound materials.

There is also a word of caution for the composer reader. Much late Twentieth Century Western art music has been dogged by an obsession with complicatedness. This has arisen partly from the permutational procedures of late serialism and also from an intellectually suspect linkage of crude information theory with musical communication - more patterns means more information, means more musical "potency". This obsession with quantity, or information overload, arises partly from the breakdown of consensus on the substance of musical meaning. In the end, the source of musical potency remains as elusive as ever but in an age which demands everything be quantifiable and measurable, a model which stresses the quantity of information, or complicatedness of an artefact, seems falsely plausible.

This danger of overkill is particularly acute with the computer- processing of sound as anything and everything can be done. For example, when composing, 1 may decide 1 need to do something with a sound which is difficult, or impossible, with my existing musical tools. 1 will therefore make a new instrument (a program) to achieve the result 1 want. Whilst building the instrument, however, 1 will make it as general purpose as possible so that it applies to all possible situations and so that all variables can vary in all possible ways. Given the power of the computer, it would be wasteful of time not to do this. This does not mean however that 1 will, or even intend to, use every conceivable option the new instrument offers. Just as with the traditional acoustic instrument, the task is to use it, to play it, well. In sound composition, this means to use the new tools in a way appropriate to the sound we are immediately dealing with and with a view to particular aesthetic objectives. There is no inherent virtue in doing everything.

EXPLICIT AND INTUITIVE KNOWLEDGE

In musical creation we can distinguish two quite distinct modes of knowing and acting. In the first, a physical movement causes an immediate result which is monitored immediately by the cars and this feedback is used to modify the action. Learned through physical practice and emulation of others and aided by discussion and description of what it involved, this real-time-monitored action type of knowledge, 1 will describe as intuitive". It applies to things we know very well (like how to walk, or how to construct meaningful sentences in our native tongue) without necessarily being able to describe explicitly what we do, or why it works. In music, intuitive knowledge is most strongly associated with musical performance.
<page>5</page>
