
CHAPTER 13
NEW APPROACHES TO FORM
BEYOND SOUND-OBJECTS
There is still the danger of regarding sound-composition as a means to provide self-contained objects
which are thenceforward to be controlled by an external architecture of Hpitch and rhythm along
traditional lines. In particular, MIDI technology (1994) makes this option so easy and other approaches
so roundabout that it is easy to give up at this stage and revert to purely traditional concepts for
building large-scale form.
Furthermore, I do not wish to decry traditional approaches to musical form-building. On the contrary a
broad knowledge of ideas about melodic construction and evolution, rhythmic organisation, HArmonic
control, large-scale musical forms in general, etc, etc, from many different cultures (both "serious" and
"popular") and historical periods, should underpin compositional choice. However, a compositional
practice confined to this, in the late Twentieth Century, will inevitably be limited. I would particularly
stress a detailed appreciation of singing styles and styles of declamation from around the world's
cultures as a way to appreciate subtleties of sonic architecture and chemistry which are often missing or
excluded from Western art music practice. Similarly, a study of the World's languages reveals the
great range of sound materials that enter into everyday human sonic articulation somewhere on the
planet.
The aim of this chapter is to suggest extensions to traditional ways of thinking. Extensions which are
grounded in sound-composition itself. These may be used to complement or to replace traditional
approaches depending on the sound context and the aesthetic aims of the composer.
MULTIDIMENSIONALITY
Given the priorities of notated Western Art Music, and the fact that these priorities are constructed into
the instrument technology (from the tempered keyboard, or keyed flute, to the MIDI protocol) it is easy
to view music as a two dimensional (Hpitch/duration) structure, "coloured-in" by sound. The very
two-dimensionality of the musical page reinforces the notion that only two significant parameters can
be precisely controlled - using horizontal staves and vertical bars. Sound composition involves
rejecting this simplistic hierarchisation.
Sounds may be organised into multi-dimensional relation sets in terms of their Hpitch and Hpitch-field,
or their pitch and pitch-band, their vowel set, harmonicity type. onset density,
vibrato-acceleration-type etc. etc. with each of these treated as distinct perceptible orderable
parameters. Not all listable parameters are perceptually separable in every case, e.g. vibrato
acceleration type may be imperceptible when onset-density is very high. But in all definable sonic
situations we have many sound parameters at our disposal.
We may also organise sounds in terms of their overall holistic qualities. This approach is appropriate
both for grain time-frame events where separable classes of properties may not be distinguishable and
for sound sets created by progressive interpolation between quite different sounds (e.g. "ko->u" to
"Bell": listen to Sound example 12.5). This latter sound interpolation illustrates the fact that we can
103