<page id=38>
Two processes are worth mentioning in this respect. Noise with transient pitch content like water falling in a stream (rather than dripping, flowing or bubbling), might be pitch-enhanced by spectral tracing (see below). (Sound example 3.11). Conversely, all sounds can be amassed to create a sound with a noise-spectrum if superimposed randomly in a sufficiently frequency-dense and time-dense way. At the end of Sound example 3.9 the noise band finally resolves into the sound of voices. The noise band was in fact simply a very dense superimposition of many vocal sounds.

Different sounds (with or without harmonicity, soft or hard-edged, spectrally bright or dull, grain-like, sustained, evolving, iterated or sequenced) may produce different qualities of noise (see Chapter 8 on Texture). There are also undoubtedly vast areas to be explored at the boundaries of inharmonicity/noise and time-fluctuating-spectrum/noise. (Sound example 3.12).

A fruitful approach to this territory might be through spectral focusing, described in Chapter 2 (and Appendix p20). This allows us to extract, from a pitched sound, either the spectral contour only, or the true partials, and to then use this data to filter a noise source. The filtered result can vary from articulated noise formants (like unvoiced speech) following just the formant articulation of the original source, to a reconstitution of the partials of the the original sound (and hence of the original sound itself). We can also move fluidly between these two states by varying the analysis window size through time. This technique can be applied to any source, whether it be spectrally pitched (harmonic), or inharmonic, and gives us a means of passing from articulate noise to articulate not-noise spectra in a seamless fashion.

Many of the sound phenomena we have discussed in this section are complex concatenations of simpler units. It is therefore worthwhile to note that any arbitrary collection of sounds, especially mixed in mono, has a well-defined time-varying spectrum - a massed group of talkers at a party; a whole orchestra individually, but simultaneously, practising their difficult passages before a concert. At each moment there is a composite spectrum for these events and any portion of it could be grist for the mill of sound composition.

SPECTRAL ENHANCEMENT

The already existing structure of a spectrum can be utilised to enhance the original sound. This is particularly important with respect to the onset portion of a sound and we will leave discussion of this until Chapter 4. We may reinforce the total spectral structure, adding additional partials by spectral shifting the sound (without changing its duration) (Appendix p18) and mixing the shifted spectrum on the original. As the digital signal will retain its duration precisely, all the components in the shifted signal will line up precisely with their non-shifted sources and the spectrum will be thickened while retaining its (fused) integrity. Octave enhancement is the most obvious approach but any interval of transposition (e.g. the tritone) might be chosen. The process might be repeated and the relative balance of the components adjusted as desired. (Appendix p48). (Sound example 3.13).

A further enrichment may be achieved by mixing an already stereo spectrum with a pitch-shifted version which is left-right inverted. Theoretically this produces merely a stage-centre resultant spectrum but in practice there appear to be frequency dependent effects which lend the resultant sound a new and richer spatial "fullness". (Sound example 3.14).
</page>
