We now arrive at an essentially abstract representation of sonic substance for, although these numbers are normally stored in the spatial medium of magnetic domains on a computer disk, or pits burned in a CD, there need be no simple relationship between their original temporal order and the physical-spatial order in which they are stored. Typically, the contents of a file on a hard disk are scattered over the disk according to the availability of storage space. What the computer can do however is to re-present
to us, in their original order, the numbers which represent the sound.

Hence what was once essentially physical and temporally ephemeral has become abstract. We can even represent the sound by writing a list of sample values (numbers) on paper, providing we specify the sample rate (how many samples occur at a regular rate, in each second), though this would take an inordinately long time to achieve in practice.

It is interesting to compare this new musical abstraction with the abstraction involved in traditional music notational practice. Traditional notation was an abstraction of general and easily quantifiable large-scale properties of sound events (or performance gestures, like some ornaments), represented in written scores. This abstracting process involves enormous compromises in that it can only deal accurately with finite sets of definable phenomena and depends on existing musical assumptions about performance practice and instrument technology to supply the missing information (i.e. most of it!) (See the discussion in On Sonic Art). In contrast, the numerical abstraction involved in digital recording leaves nothing to the imagination or foreknowledge of the musician, but consequently conveys no abstracted information on the macro level.

THE REPRESENTATION OF SOUND - THE DUALITY OF TIME AND FREQUENCY

So far our discussion has focused on the representation of the actual wave-movement of the air by physical and digital analogues. However, there is an alternative way to think about and to represent a sound. Let us assume to begin with that we have a sound which is not changing in quality through time.  If we look at the pressure wave of this sound it will be found to repeat its pattern regularly (See Appendix p3).

However, perceptually we are more interested in the perceived properties of this sound. Is it pitched or noisy (or both)? Can we perceive pitches within it? etc. In fact the feature underlying these perceived properties of a static sound is the disposition of its partials. These may be conceived of as the simpler vibrations from which the actual complex waveform is constructed. It was Fourier (an Eighteenth Century French mathematician investigating heat distribution in solid objects) who realised that any particular wave-shape (or, mathematically, any function) can be recreated by summing together elementary sinusoidal waves of the correct frequency and loudness (Appendix p2). In acoustics these are known as the partials of the sound. (Appendix p3).

If we have a regular repeating wave-pattern we can therefore also represent it by plotting the frequency and loudness of its partials, a plot known as the spectrum of the sound. We can often deduce perceptual information about the sound from this data. The pattern of partials will determine if the sound will be perceived as having a single pitch or several pitches (like a bell) or even (with singly pitched sounds) what its pitch might be.

The spectral pattern which produces a singly pitched sound has (in most cases) a particularly simple structure, and is said to be "harmonic". Thus should not to be confused with the traditional notion of
<page>15</page>
