<page id=64>
Alternatively, Clarence Barlow has defined an "indispensability factor" for each event in a rhythmic grouping, e.g. a 6/8 bar. This defines how important the presence or absence of an event is to our perception of that grouping. In 6/8 for example, the first note of the 6 is most important, the 4th note (which begins the 2nd set of 3 notes) the next, and so on. In 3/4 over the same 6 quavers, the indispensability factors will be arranged in a different order, stressing the division of the 6 into 3 groups of 2. These factors are then used to define the probability that a note will occur in any rhythmic sequence and by varying these probabilities, we can e.g. vary our perception of 6/8-ness versus 3/4-ness. Also, by making all notes equally probable, all stress regularity is lost and the sequence becomes arhythmic above the quaver pulse level. (Diagram 2). (Sound example 7.21).

ORDERING ORDER

We can also work with order-groupings of order-groupings e.g. with Hpitches, altering the time-sequencing of motivic-groups-taken-as-wholes. There is an extensive musical literature discussing order-regrouping, especially of Hpitches, and all such considerations can be applied to any subset of the properties of sounds, or to sounds as wholes.

Here we are beginning to stray beyond the frame of reference of this chapter, because reordering principles can be applied on larger and larger time-frames and are the substance of traditional musical "form". From a perceptual point of view, I would argue that the larger the time-frame (phrase-frame and beyond), the more perception is dependent on long term memory, and the less easy pattern-retention and recall becomes. Hence larger scale order relations tend to become simpler, in traditional practice, as we deal with larger and larger time-frames. This is not to say that, in traditional practice, the "repeated" objects are not internally varied in more complicated ways at smaller time-frames, but as large time-block qua large time-blocks, the permutation structure tends to be simpler. (Such matters are discussed in greater detail in Chapter 9).

The computer, having no ear or human musical judgement, can manipulate order sequences of any length and of any unit-size in an entirely equivalent manner. As composers, however, we must be clear about the relationships of such operations to our time experience. Equivalence in the numerical domain of the computer (or for that matter on the spatial surface of a musical score) is not the same as experiential equivalence. Audible design requires musical judgement and cannot be "justified" on the basis of the computer-logic of a generating process.

In fact, as the elements of our sequence become larger, we pass over from one time-frame to another.  Thus the temporal extension of a sequence (by unit respacing, time-stretching etc.) is a way of passing from one perceptual time-frame to another, just as time-shrinking will ultimately contract the sequence into an essentially continuous perceptual event. With time-expansion, the perceptual boundaries are less clear, but no less important.

Permutational logic is heady stuff and relationships of relationships can breed in an explosive fashion, like Fibonacci's rabbits. Permuting and otherwise reordering sequences in ever more complicated ways is something that computers do with consummate ease. A powerful order-manipulation instrument can be written in a few lines of computer code, whereas what might appear to be a simple spectral-processing procedure might run to several pages. The questions must always be, does the listener hear those reorderings and if so, are they heard directly, or as field constraints on the total
</page>
