<page id=61>
In the finite space of a musical composition we may expect a reference set (field) and ordering properties to be established quite quickly if they are to be used as musically composed elements. On the larger scale, these may be predetermined by cultural norms, like tuning systems or the phoneme set of a natural language, but traditional musical practice is usually concerned with working on subsets of these cultural norms and exploring the particular properties and malleabilities of these subsets.

In this context the size of the field is significant. Musical settings of prose, for example, may treat the Hpitch (and duration) material in terms of a small ordered reference set which is constantly regrouped in subsets (e.g. chord formations over a scale) and reordered (motivic variation), whereas the phonetic material establishes no such small time-frame field and order properties - the text is used as referential language, and field and order properties are on the very large timescale of extensive language utterance. In this situation, the text is perceived as being in a separate domain to the "musical".

Poetry, however, through assonance, alliteration and particularly rhyme, begins to adopt the small-scale reference-frame and order sequencing for phonemes we find normal in traditional musical practice. We therefore discover a meeting ground between phonemic and traditional Hpitch and durational musical concerns and these connections have been explored by sound poets (Amirkhanian etc) and composers (Berio etc) alike. As we move towards poetry which is more strongly focused in the sonority of words, or just of syllabic utterance, the importance of small-scale reference-frame and order sequencing may become overriding (e.g. Schwitters Ursonata). (Sound example 7.12).

COMPOSING FIELD PROPERTIES

Constructing sequences from existing non-sequenced, or differently sequenced, objects (a flute melody, or an upward sweeping noise-band, or a traffic recording in a tunnel with a particular strong resonance, or a conversation in Japanese) ensures that some field properties of the source sounds will inhere in the resulting sequence: a defined Hpitch reference set and a flute spectrum (with or without onset characteristics; in the latter case the field is altered), rising noise-bands within a given range, the resonance characteristics of the tunnel, the spectral characteristics of the phonemes of Japanese and perhaps the sex characteristics of the specific voices. These field properties may then define the boundaries of the compositional domain (a piano is a piano is a piano is a piano) or conversely become part of the substance of it, as we transform the field characteristics (piano "bell" "gong" -> "cymbal" unvoiced sibilant etc.). (Sound example 7.13).

Compositionally we can transform the field (reference-set) of a sequence through time by gradual substitution of one element for another or by the addition of new elements or reduction in the total number of elements (this can be done with or without a studio!). We can also gradually transform each element (e.g. by destructive distortion with inbetweening, see Chapter 12) so that the elements of a sequence become more differentiated or, conversely, more and more similar moving towards a grain-stream (see above), or simply different. (Sound example 7.14).

Or we may blur the boundaries between the elements through processes like reverberation, delay, small time-frame brassage, spectral blurring, spectral shuffling, waveset shuffling, or granular reconstruction), or simply through time-contraction (of various sorts) so that the sequence succession rate falls below the grain time-frame and the percept becomes continuous. We thus move a sequence
</page>
