
This suggests the third approach to time-stretching. In this case we may generate events at the
original density, but for a longer time, then impose time-dilated field-variation parameters on the
stream. Here the loudness trajectory, the pitch-range variation, the formant changes, the transitions to
noisiness etc would move more slowly, but the event-onset density would remain as before. This is the
textural equivalent of granular time-stretching by grain duplication. (Sound example 11.38).
We here begin to touch upon interesting music-philosophical ground. For in this last case, the
texture-stream percept is clearly not a "unique" sound-event, in the sense which we spoke of this in
Chapter 1. The texture-stream is an example of a class of sounds with certain definable time-varying
properties, just as a note, in traditional music, is a representative of a class of sounds with certain
definable stable properties. It is the musical context which focuses our attention upon particular
properties, or groups of properties of a sound, or on its holistic characteristics. Composition focuses
perception on what is being perceptually organised through time. Or rather it does this so long as it is
aware of what can be perceived and what will be perceived in the resulting musical stream.
We have hence given three quite different definitions of time-stretching a texture-stream. If we
include the possibility of spectrally time-stretching the texture-components prior to generating the
texture-stream, we may imagine another option in which the texture constituents are spectrally
time-stretched (this time-stretching itself changing from constituent to constituent, as we proceed
timewise through the texture) while (as far as is possible) the temporal evolution of density and field
characteristics remain unchanged. This might better be regarded as a time-varying
spectral-type/duration-type transformation of the source texture.
In fact we can time-stretch event-onset-separation-density variation, event-duration variation.
overall loudness trajectory, pitch-range variation, evolution of the spectral contour (formant evolution)
etc. etc. all independently of one another. Time has thus become a multi-dimensional phenomena
within the sound percept and we may choose amongst the many compositional options available to US.
95