The internal structure of grains and their indivisibility was brought home to me through working with birdsong. A particular song consisted of a rapid repeated sound having a "bubbly" quality. One might presume from this that the individual sounds were internally portamentoed at a rate too fast to be heard. In fact, when slowed down to 1/8th speed, each sound was found to be comprised of a rising scale passage followed by a brief portamento!

Longer sound events can often be described in terms of an onset or attack event and a continuation.  The onset usually has the timescale and hence the indivisibility and qualitative unity of a grain and we will return to this later. But if the sound persists beyond a new time limit (around .05 seconds) we have enough information to detect its temporal evolution, we become aware of movements of pitch or loudness, or evolution of the spectrum. The sound is no longer an indivisible grain: we have reached the sphere of Continuation.

This is the next important time-frame after Grain. It has great significance in the processing of sounds.  For example, in the technique known as brassage, we chop up a sound into tiny segments and then splice these back together again. If we retain the order of the segments using overlapping segments from the original sound, but don't overlap them (so much) in the resulting sound, we will clearly end up with a longer sound (Appendix p44).

If we try to make segments smaller than the grain-size, we will destroy the signal because the splices (cross-fading) between each segment will be so short as to break up the continuity of the source and destroy the signal characteristics. For example, attempting to time-stretch by a factor of 2 we will in fact resplice together parts of the waveform itself, to make a waveform twice as long, and our sound will drop by an octave, as in tape-speed variation. If the segments are in the grain time-frame, the instantaneous pitch will be preserved, as the waveform itself will be preserved intact, and we should achieve a time-stretching of the sound without changing its pitch (the harmoniser algorithm). If the segments are longer than grains, their internal structure will be heard out and we will begin to notice echo effects as the perceived continuations are heard to be repeated. Eventually, we will produce a collage of motifs or phrases cut from the original material, as the segment size becomes very much larger than the grain time-frame. (Sound example 1.1).

The grain/continuation time-frame boundary is also of crucial importance when a sound is being time-stretched and this will be discussed more fully in Chapter 11.

The boundaries between these time-frames (wavecycle, grain, continuation) are not, of course, completely clear cut and interesting perceptual ambiguities occur if we alter the parameters of a process so that it crosses these time-frame thresholds. In the simplest case, gradually time-stretching a grain gradually makes its internal structure apparent (See Chapter 11) so we can pass from an indivisible qualitative event to an event with a clearly evolving structure of its own. Conversely, a sound with clear internal structure can be time-contracted into a structurally irresolvable grain. (Sound example 1.2).

Once we reach the sphere of continuation, perceptual descriptions become more involved and perceptual boundaries, as our time frame enlarges, less clear cut. If the spectrum has continuity, perception of continuation may be concerned with the morphology (changing shape) of the spectrum, with the articulation of pitch (vibrato, jitter), loudness (tremolo), spectral contour or formant gliding (see Chapter 3) etc, etc. The continuation may, however, be discontinuous as in iterative sounds (grain-streams - such as rolled "R", and low contrabassoon notes which are perceived partly as a rapid sequence of onsets) or segmented sounds (see below), or granular texture streams (e.g. maracas
<page>18</page>
