<page id=29>
There are also some fast techniques that can be used in special cases. Once the pitch of a sound is known, we can transpose it up an octave using comb-filter transposition (Appendix p65). Here we delay the signal by half the wavelength of the fundamental and add the result to the original signal. This process cancels (by phase-inversion) the odd harmonics while reinforcing the even harmonics. Thus if we start with a spectrum whose partials are at 100, 200, 300, 400, 500 etc with a fundamental at 100Hz, we are left with partials at 200, 400 etc whose fundamental lies at 200Hz, an octave above the original sound. A modification of the technique, using the Hilbert transform, allows us to make an octave downward transposition in a similar manner. The process is particularly useful because it does not disturb the contour of the spectrum (the formants are not affected : see Chapter 3) so it can be applied successfully to vocal sounds.

It is important to emphasize that pitch manipulation does not have to be embedded in a traditional approach to Hpitches. The power of pitch-tracking is that it allows us to trace and transfer the most subtle or complex pitch flows and fluctuations without necessarily being able to assign specific Hpitch values at any point. For example, the subtleties of portamento and vibrato articulation in a particular established vocal or instrumental idiom, or in a naturally recorded bird or animal cry, could be transferred to an arbitrarily chosen non-instrumental, non-vocal, or even synthetic sound-object. It would even be possible to interpolate between such articulation styles without at any stage having a quantifiable (measurable) or notatable representation of them - we do not need to be able to measure or analytically explain a phenomenon to make an aesthetic decision about it.

NEW PROBLEMS IN CHANGING PITCH

Changing the pitch of a musical event would seem, from a traditional perspective, to be the most obvious thing to do. Instruments are set up, either as collections of similar objects (strings, metal bars, wooden bars etc.), or with variable access to the same objects (flute fingerholes, violin fingerboard, brass valves) to permit similar sounds with different pitches to be produced rapidly and easily.

There are two problems when we try to transfer this familiar notion to sound composition. Firstly, we do not necessarily want to confine ourselves to a finite set of pitches or to steady pitches (an Hpitch set). More importantly the majority of sounds do not come so easily prepackaged either because the circumstances of their production cannot be reproduced (breaking a sheet of glass every sheet will break differently, no matter how much care we take!), or because the details of their production cannot be precisely remembered (a spoken phrase can be repeated at different pitches by the same voice within a narrow range but, assuming natural speech inflection, the fine details of articulation cannot usually be precisely remembered).

In fact changing the pitch on an instrument does involve some spectral compromises, e.g. low and high pitches on the piano have a very different spectral quality but we have come to regard these discrepancies as acceptable through the skill of instrument design (the piano strings resonate in the same sound-box and there is a relatively smooth transition in quality from low to high strings), and the familiarity of tradition. We are not, in fact, changing the pitch of the original sound, but producing another sound, whose relationship to the original is acceptable.
</page>
