The world of sound-composition has been hampered by being cast in the role of a poor relation to more traditional musical practice. In particular the vast body of analytical and critical writings in the musicology of Western Art music is strongly oriented to the study of musical texts (scores) rather than to a discipline of acute aural awareness in itself. Sound composition requires the development of both new listening and awareness skills for the composer and, I would suggest, a new analytical and critical discipline founded in the study of the sonic experience itself, rather than its representation in a text.  This new paradigm is beginning to struggle into existence against the immense inertia of received wisdom about 'musical structure'.

I have discussed elsewhere (On Sonic Art) the strong influence of mediaeval 'text worship' on the critical/analytical disciplines which have evolved in music. Both the scientific method and technologised industrial society have had to struggle against the passive authority of texts declaring eternal truths and values inimical to the scientific method and to technological advance.

I don't wish here to decry the idea that there may be "universal truths" about human behaviour and human social interaction which science and technology are powerless to alter. But because our prime medium for the propagation of knowledge is the written text, powerful institutions have grown up around the presentation, analysis and evaluation of texts and textual evidence so powerful that their influence can be inappropriate.

In attempting to explore the area of composing with sound, this book will adopt the point of view of a scientific researcher delving into an unknown realm. We are looking for evidence to back up any hypotheses we may have about potential musical structure and this evidence comes from our perception of sounds themselves. (Scientific readers may be surprised to hear that this stance may be regarded as polemical by many musical theorists).

In line with this view, therefore, this book is not intended to be read without listening to the sound examples which accompany it. In the scientific spirit, these are presented as evidence of the propositions being presented. You are at liberty to affirm or deny what 1 have to say through your own experience, but this book is based on the assumption that the existence of structure in music is a matter of fact to be decided by listening to the sounds presented, not a matter of opinion to be decided on the authority of a musical text (a score or a book even this one), or the importance of the scholar or composer who declares structure to be present (1 shall return to such matters in particular in Chapter 9 on 'Time').

However, this is not a scientific text. Our interest in exploring this new area is not to discover universal laws of perception but to suggest what might be fruitful approaches for artists who wish to explore the vast domain of new sonic possibilities opened up by sound recording and computer technology.

We might in fact argue that the truly potent texts of our times are certainly not texts like this book, or even true scientific theories, but computer programs themselves. Here, the religious or mystical potency with which the medieval text was imbued has been replaced by actual physical efficacy. For the text of a computer program can act on the world through associated electronic and mechanical hardware, to make the world anew, and in particular to create new and unheard sonic experiences. Such texts are potent but, at the same time, judgeable. They do not radiate some mystical authority to which we must kow-tow, but do something specific in the world which we can judge to be more or less successful. And if we are dissatisfied, the text can be modified to produce a more satisfactory result.
<page>3</page>
