<page id=63>
can be most easily observed as patternable properties in language or language-derived syllables, but formant and onset characteristics can be extracted and altered in all sounds.

We might imagine an unordered set of sounds and which define no small reference set, on which we impose a sequence of "bright", "hard", "soft", "subdued" etc. attacks as a definable sequence. The continuations of such sounds might be recognisable (e.g. water, speech, a bell, a piano concerto excerpt etc.) but ordering principles are applied just to the onset types. This is an extreme example because I wish to stress the point that order can be applied to many different properties and can be used to focus the listener's attention on the ordered property, or to contrast the area of order manipulation with that of lesser order. In the setting of prose this contrast is clear. In our extreme example we have suggested a kind of ordering of onset characteristics laid against a "cinematographic" montage which might have an alternative narrative logic - the two might offset and comment upon one another in the same way that motivic (and rhythmic) ordering and the narrative content of prose do so in traditional musical settings of prose.

Ordering principles can, of course, also be applied to sounds as wholes. So any fixed set of sounds can be rearranged as wholes and these order relations explored and elaborated. A traditional example is English change-ringing where the sequence in which a fixed set of bells is rung goes through an ordered sequence of permutations. (See Diagram 1). (Sound example 7.18).

STRESS PATTERNS AND RHYTHM

We can apply different order-groupings to mutually exclusive sets of properties (e.g. onset, continuation, loudness, as against Hpitch) within the same reference-set of sounds. Onset characteristics and overall loudness are often organised cooperatively to create stress patterns in sequences. Combined with the organisation of durations, we have the group of properties used to define rhythm. Rhythmic structure can be established independently of Hpitch structure (as in a drum-kit solo) or parallel to and independently of Hpitch order relations. Most pre twentieth century European art music and e.g. Indian classical music, separates out these two groupings of sound properties and orders them in a semi-independent but mutually interactive way (HArmonic rhythm in Western Music, melodic/rhythmic cadencing in Indian Classical Music).

Again, whole volumes might be devoted to rhythmic organisation but as there is already an extensive literature on this, I will confine myself to just a few observations.

Stress patterns may be established, even cyclical stress patterns, independent of duration organisation, or on a regular duration pattern that is subsequently permuted or time-warped in a continuously varying manner, a feature over which we can have complete control in sound composition. Hence, stress duration patterns at different tempi, or at different varying tempi, can be organised in such a way that they synchronise at exactly defined times, these times perhaps themselves governed by larger time-frame stress patterns. (See Chapter 9). (Sound example 7.19).

By subtle continuous control of relative loudness or onset characteristics, we can change the perception of the stress pattern. It might, for example, be possible to create superimposed grouping perceptions on the same stream of semiquaver units, e.g. grouped in 5 and in 7 and in 4 and to change their relative perceptual prominence by subtly altering loudness balance or onset characteristics or in fact to destroy grouping perception by a gradual randomisation of stress information. Here field variation is altering order perception. (Sound example 7.20).
</page>
