
STOCHASTIC PROCESSES
A process in which the probabilities of proceeding from one state, or set of states, to another, is defined.
The temporal evolution of the process is therefore governed by a kind of weighted randomness, which
can be chosen to give anything from an entirely determined outcome, to an entirely unpredictable one.
SYNTHESIS
Process of generating a sound from digital data, or from the parameters supplied to an electrical
oscillator. Originally synthetic sounds were recognisably such, but now it is possible, through a process
of careful analysis and subtle transformation, to recreate a recorded sound in a changed form which
however sound as convincingly 'natural' as the recording of the original sound.
***** T *****
TAPE-ACCELERATION
36
TAPE-SPEED VARIATION
36
TEMPERED TUNING
The tuning of the scales used in European music., a system which became firmly established in the
early eighteenth century. In tempered tuning the octave is divided into 12 exactly equal semitones. i.e.
the ratio between the frequencies of any two pitches which are a semitone apart is exactly the same. In
a harmonic spectrum, the frequencies of the partials are exact multiples of some fundamental frequency.
The ratio of their frequencies form a pattern known as the harmonic series i.e.
2/1 3/2 4/3 5/4 6/5 7/6
and the frequency ratios between members of this series are known as 'pure' intervals. Some pure
interval ratios are..
octave..2/1
4th
4/3
5th.....3/2
7th
7/4
There is no common smaller interval from which all these 'pure' intervals can be constructed. Hence the
striving to achieve some kinds of compromise tunings, of which the tempered scale is just one example.
Apart from the octave, the tempered scale only approximates frequency ratios of the pure intervals. The
7th has no close approximation in the tempered scale.
TEMPO
The rate at which musical events occur. In european music the relative duration of events are indicated
by note values e.g. a crotchet is as long as two quavers. The speed of the whole will be indicated by a
tempo marking e.g.
crotchet = 120
which means there are to be 120 crotchets in one minute.
133