<page id=20>
Thus, for example, we may spectrally time-stretch and change the loudness trajectory (enveloping) of a vocal sound, producing wood-like attacks, which are then progressively distorted to sound like unpitched drum sounds. (Sound example 1.4).

In general, sounds may be activated in two ways - by a single physical event (e.g. a striking blow), or by a continuous physical event (blowing, bowing, scraping). In the first case, the sound may be internally damped producing a short sound, or grain - a xylophone note, a drum-stroke, a vocal click. It may be short, but permitted to resonate through an associated physical system, e.g. a cello soundbox for a pizzicato note, a resonant hall for a drum stroke. Or the material itself may have internal resonating properties (bells, gongs, metal tubes) producing a gradually attenuated continuum of sound.

In the case of continuous excitation of a medium, the medium may resonate, producing a steady pitch which varies in loudness with the energy of the excitation e.g. Flute, Tuba, Violin. The medium may vibrate at a frequency related to the excitation force (e.g. a rotor-driven siren, or the human voice in some circumstances) so that a varying excitation force varies the pitch. Or the contact between exciting force and vibrating medium may be discontinuous, producing an iterated sound (rolled "R", drum roll etc).

The vibrating medium itself may be elastically mobile - a flexatone, a flexed metal sheet, a mammalian larynx - so that the pitch or spectrum of the sound varies through time. The material may be only gently coaxed into motion (the air in a "Bloogle", the shells in a Rainmaker) giving the sound a soft onset, or the material may be loosely bound and granular (the sand or beads in a Shaker or Wind-machine) giving the sound a diffuse continuation. Resonating systems will stabilise after a variety of transient or unstable initiating events (flute breathiness, coarse hammer blows to a metal sheet) so that a complex and disconnected onset leads to a stable or stably evolving spectrum.

I am not suggesting that we consciously analyse our aural experience in this way. On the contrary, aural experience is so important to us that we already have an intuitive knowledge (see earlier) of the physicality of sound-sources. 1 also do not mean that we see pictures of physical objects when we hear sounds, only that our aural experience is grounded in physical experience in a way which is not necessarily consciously understood or articulated. Transforming the characteristics of a sound-source automatically involves transforming its perceived physicality and this may be an important feature to bear in mind in sound composition.


In a similar and not easily disentangled way, the onset (or attack) properties of a sound give us some inkling of the cause of that sound - a physical blow, a scraping contact, a movement, a vocal utterance.  The onset or attack of a sound is always of great significance if only because it is the moment of greatest surprise when we know nothing about the sound that is to evolve, whereas during the continuation phase of the sound, we are articulating what the onset has revealed. It is possible to give the most unlikely sounds an apparent vocal provenance by very carefully splicing a vocal onset onto a non-vocal continuation. The vocal "causality" in the onset can adhere to the ensuing sound in the most unlikely cases.
</page>
