credentials as an "original" artist. However, an instrument builder must demonstrate the viability and efficacy of any new instrument being presented. Does it provide a satisfying balance of restrictions and flexibilities to allow a sophisticated performance practice to emerge?

For the performer he/she is performing on a new instrument which is composed of the complete system acoustic-instrument-plus- electronic-network. Any new instrument takes time to master. Hence there is a danger that a piece for electronically processed acoustic instrument will fall short of our musical expectations because no matter how good the performer, his or her mastery of the new system is unlikely to match his or her mastery of the acoustic instrument alone with the centuries of performance practice from which it arises. There is a danger that electronic extension may lead to musical trivialisation. Because success in this sphere depends on a marriage of good instrument design and evolving performance practice, it takes time! From this perspective it might be best to establish a number of sophisticated electronic-extension-archetypes which performers could, in time, learn to master as a repertoire for these new instruments develops.

The second paradigm is that of pure electro-acoustic (studio) composition. Such composition may be regarded as suffering from the disadvantage that it is not a 'before your very eyes', and interpreted medium. In this respect it has the disadvantages, but also the advantages, that film has viz-a-viz theatre. What film lacks in the way of reinterpretable archetypicality(!) it makes up for in the closely observed detail of location and specifically captured human uniqueness. Similarly, studio composition can deal with the uniqueness of sonic events and with the conjuring of alternative or imaginary sonic landscapes outside the theatre of musical performance itself. Moreover, sound diffusion adds an element of performance and interpretation (relating a work to the acoustic environment in which it is presented) not available in the presentation of cinema.

However, electro-acoustic composition does present us with an entirely new dilemma. Performed music works on sound archetypes. When I finger an "mf E" on a flute, 1 expect to hear an example of a class of possible sounds which all satisfy the restrictions placed on being a flute "mf E". Without this fact there can be no interpretation of a work. However, for a studio composer, every sound may be treated as a unique event. Its unique properties are reproducible and can be used as the basis of compositional processes which depend on those uniquenesses. The power of the computer to both record and transform any sound whatsoever, means that a "performance practice" (so to speak) in the traditional sense is neither necessarily attainable or desirable. But as a result the studio composer must take on many of the functions of the performer in sound production and articulation.

This does not necessarily mean, however, that all aspects of sound design need to be explicitly understood. As argued above, the success of studio produced sound-art depends on the fusion of the roles of composer and performer in the studio situation. For this to work effectively, real-time processing (wherever this is feasible) is a desirable goal.

In many studio situations in which I have worked, in order to produce some subtly time-varying modification of a sound texture or process, I had to provide to a program a file listing the values some parameter will take and the times at which it will reach those values (a breakpoint table). I then ran the program and subsequently heard the result. If 1 didn't like this result, I had to modify the values in the table and run the program again, and so on. It is clearly simpler and more efficacious, when first exploring any time-varying process and its effect on a particular sound, to move a fader, turn a knob, bow a string, blow down a tube (etc) and hear the result of this physical action as I make it. 1 can then adjust my physical actions to satisfy my aural experience - I can explore intuitively, without going through any conscious explanatory control process.
<page>8</page>
