<page id=107>
and devotees of various pre-tempered approaches to tuning (e.g. just intonation), however would beg to differ from this analysis.

For them the interval we know as the 5th derives from the second two partials in a harmonic spectrum.  The ratio of their frequencies is exactly 3:2 or 1.5 However, in the tempered scale, where larger intervals must always be expressible as exact multiples of the semitone (whose frequency ratio is 2 raised to the power of 1/12), the interval of a 5th is 2 raised to the power of 7/12, or approximately 1.498307077. In fact, in terms of frequency, the tempered scale 5th cannot be expressed as an exact ratio of any two whole numbers; it is not a rational number (in the mathematical sense). (It is certainly out of tune with the 'pure' fifth).

The tritone in the tempered scale, roughly corresponding to the mediaeval "devil in music", is even more instructive in this regard. For the tempered scale tritone corresponds to a precise frequency ratio of the-square-root-of-2:1 And the square root of 2 is perhaps the most famous non-rational number of all.

Pythagoras' discovery of the link between musical pitch relationships and the length ratios of vibrating strings spawned the pythagorean cult which linked mathematics, mystical numerology and music.  However, it was the Greek discovery of the non-rationality of the square root of 2 which destroyed Greek arithmetic and led to an almost complete reliance on geometrical methods. For the square root of 2, the length of the diagonal of a square of unit side, is perfectly comprehensible geometrically.  However as a number it cannot be expressed as the ratio of two other numbers. This was proved by the Greeks and seemed hopelessly baffling. The square root of 2 is simply not a rational number (a number expressible as a fraction).

It was only 2,000 years later, in the Seventeenth Century, with Descartes' development of coordinate geometry (linking geometrical and numerical thinking) and Newton's use of fluxions, (the origin of the calculus) to study accelerated motion, that mathematicians began to deal in a sophisticated way with the numerical continuum. And it was not until the Nineteenth Century that a rigorous definition of these new numbers, the very stuff of the continuum, was developed.

The numbers which form the continuum (and which include the rational numbers) are known as the Real Numbers. So, in the mathematical world, the rational appears as only a small part (in fact an infinitely small part) of the Real!

In a sense, Western musical practice has remained overawed by the Pythagorean fixation with the mathematically rational. The obsession with geometrical proportions in written scores may be seen as an aspect of the persistence of this tradition.

But the computer as a recording and transformational tool has altered our relationship to the musical continuum. Sampling is a means whereby the continuum of our sonic experience can be captured and subjected to rational calculation. The key to this is the existence of perceptual time-frames. Below a certain duration limit (as discussed in Chapter 1) we can no longer distinguish individual sound events, hence our perception of the continuity of experience can be recreated by piecing together extremely short, but stable, sound elements. Just as the 24 or 25 static frames of film or video create for us the illusion of seamless motion, the reconstruction of a sound from a windowed analysis, or the playing of samples through a digital to analogue converter, recreates for us a continuous sonic domain from what are fixed and countable values. The computer thus provides a link between the world of rational
</page>
