
Brassage may be extended in a variety of ways, using larger and variable length segments, varying the
time-range in the source from which the goal segment may be selected, varying the pitch, loudness
and/or spatial position of successive segments and, ultimately, varying the output event density. We
thus move gradually out of the field of time-stretching into that of generalised brassage and granular
reconstruction. (These possibilities are discussed in more detail in Chapter 5 in the section
"Constructed Continuation" and in Appendix pp44-45 and Appendix p73). We need add only that
using Granular Reconstruction with time-varying parameters (average segment length, length spread,
search range, pitch, loudness, spatial divergence and output density) it is possible to create, in a single
event, a version of a source sound which begins as mere time-stretch and ends as a texture stream
development of that source.
A more time-stretching satisfactory application of the Brassage process to sequences such as speech
streams can be achieved by source-segment-synchronous brassage. In this case we need to apply a
sophisticated combination of envelope following, and pitch-synchronous spectral analysis to isolate the
individual segments of the source stream. These can then be individually brassage-time-stretched
and respliced together in one operation. Because none of the goal segments crossover between source
segments, we avoid artefacts created at source segment boundaries in simple brassage (see Diagram
1).
WAVESET TIME-STRETCHING
Time-stretching can be achieved by searching for zero-crossing pairs and repeating the wavesets thus
found (see Appendix p55). This technique will produce only integral time-multiples of the source
duration. As discussed elsewhere, two zero-crossings do not necessarily correspond to a wavecycle (a
true wavelength of the signal) so a waveset is not necessarily a wavecycle. As a result this technique
will have some unpredictable, though often interesting, sonic consequences. Sometimes parts of the
signal will pitch-shift (e.g. at x2 time-stretch, by an octave downwards, as in tape-speed variation).
For a x2 (or even x3) time-stretch, artefacts can often be reduced by repeating pairs (or larger groups)
of wavesets (a special case of pitch- synchronous brassage). These kinds of artefacts can of course be
avoided, in truly pitched material, by using a pitch-following instrument to help us to distinguish the
true wavecycles. (Sound example 11.6).
As the number of repetitions increases, other artefacts begin to appear. At x3 there is often a
"phasing"-lik coloration of the sound. With time evolving and noisy signals, at x16 time stretch a
rapid stream of pitched beads is produced as each waveset group achieves (near-) grain dimensions
and is heard out in pitch and spectral terms. (No such change occurs, however, in a steady tone or
stable spectrum.) This spectral fission is heard "subliminally" within the source even at x4
time-stretch. (Appendix p55). (Sound example 11.7).
It is possible also to interpolate between waveset durations and between waveset shapes through the
sequence of repetitions. In x64 time-stretching with such interpolation the new signal clearly glides
around in pitch as each "bead" pitch glides into the next. At x16 time-stretch, we are aware more of
the "fluidity" of a bead-stream rather than of a continually portamentoing line. Even at x4
time-stretch, this fluidity quality contributes to the percept in an intangible way. (Sound example
11.8).
88