<page id=75>
A more interesting example is presented by the sequence in Diagram 4. If this rhythm occurs in a context where there is a clear underlying semiquaver reference-frame, and the sequence is played "precisely" as written. we will perceive the 3:1:3:1:3:1 etc. sequence of duration proportions clearly - our perception will be measured. However, in many cases, this time pattern is encountered where the main reference frame is the crotchet, and the pattern may be more loosely interpreted by the performer, veering towards 2:1:2:1: etc. at the extreme. Here we are perceiving a regular alternation of short and long durations which, however, are not necessarily perceived in some measurable proportions. The score may given an illusory rigour to a 3:1 definition, but we are concerned here with the percept.  (Sound example 9.4).

The way in which such crotchet beats are divided is one aspect of a sense of "swing" in certain styles of music. A particular drummer, for example, may have an almost completely regular long-short division of the crotchet in the proportion 37:26. We may be aware of the regularity of his/her beat and appreciative of the particular quality of this division in the sense of the particular sense of swing it imparts to his/her playing while remaining completely unaware of the exact numerical proportions involved. Here then we have a comparative perception with fundamental qualitative consequences.  (Sound example 9.5).

It is important to note at this point that our perception of traditional fully-scored music is comparative in many respects and in some respects textural to the extent that e.g. the precise morphology of each violin note cannot be specified in the notation and varies arbitrarily over a small range of possibilities, as does the vibrato of opera singers. In sound composition, these factors can be precisely specified and, if desired, raised to the level of comparative, or measured, perception.

More importantly, our rhythmic example using dotted rhythms illustrates the second aspect of our discussion. For in this example, perception at the level of the crotchet remains measured - the music is "in time". However, simultaneously, in a smaller time-frame, our perception has become comparative.

We can see the same division into time-frames if we look again at the idea of "indispensability factor" proposed by Clarence Barlow (see Chapter 7). As discussed previously, we can define, over a reference frame of quavers, the relative indispensability of each note in a 6/8 or a 3/4 (or a 7/8) pattern.  Linking the probability of occurrence of a note to its indispensability factor allows us to generate a strong 6/8 grouping feel, or a strong 3/4 feel, or an ambiguous percept between the two. Once every quaver becomes equally probable, however, the sense of grouping breaks down altogether and at the level of 6-groupings (7-groupings, or any groupings) measured perception is lost. Our perception reverts to the field characteristics. In this case, however, the field is defined by a smaller set of durations, the quavers themselves. So at the smaller time-frame, we retain a sense of measured regularity and hence our perception there is measured perception.

SHORT DURATION REFERENCE-FRAMES : RHYTHMIC DISSOLUTION

There are, however, limits to this time-frame switch phenomena. On the large scale, if the pulse cycle becomes too long (e.g. 30 minutes), we will no longer perceive it as a time reference-frame (some musicians will dispute this, see below). More significantly, if the pulse-frame becomes too small we also lose a sense of measurability and hence of measured perception. We cannot give a precise figure for this limit. We can perceive the regularity of grain down to the lower limit of grain perception but comparative judgements of grain-durations, especially in more demanding proportions (5:7 as opposed to 1:2), seems to break down well above this limit.
</page>
