
R
RANDOM-CUTTING
41
REFERENCE FRAME
A set of values which provide a reference set against which other values can be measured. e.g. the
chromatic scale as a reference set for european harmony, the set of vowels in standard english as a
reference set for classifying regional accents etc.
RESONANCE
If an object is vibrated it will produce a sound. Due to its particular weight, size and shape there will be
certain frequencies at which it will vibrate 'naturally'. If supplied with frequency-unspecific energy it
will tend to vibrate at these natural resonant frequencies. A flute tube with a certain combination of
closed holes has specific resonant frequencies which produce the pitches for that fingering. A hall or
building will reinforce certain frequencies in a voice, orchestra etc which fall on its natural resonant
frequencies.
RETROGRADE
The performance of a sequence of sound events in the reverse order. A-B-C-D-E becomes
E-D-C-B-A. Note that the sound-events themselves are not reversed.
REVERBERATION
64
RITARDANDO
A decrease in the speed at which musical events succeed one another.
SAMPLER
A piece of hardware, or a software package on a computer, which that digitally records any sound and
allows it to be manipulated (e.g. pitch-change by 'tape-speed' variation with the specific transposition
information sent from a MIDI keyboard). The sounds recorded on a sampler are often referred to in the
commercial literature as 'samples'. These should not be confused with the individual numbers used to
record the shape of the waveform itself, which are properly known as samples. (See SAMPLING).
SAMPLING
1
Sound is digitally recorded by sampling the value of the (electrical analogue of the) sound wave, at
regular time- intervals. These time intervals must be very short if high frequencies in the sound are to
be resolved. (e.g. between 22000 and 48000 samples per second). At a sampling rate of 48000 samples
per second, the highest resolvable frequency is 24000 cycles per second.
129