Such waves are, of their very nature, ephemeral. Without some means to 'halt time' and to capture their form out of time, we cannot begin to manipulate them. Before the Twentieth Century this was technologically impossible. Music was reproducible through the continuity of instrument design and performance practice and the medium of the score, essentially a set of instructions for producing sounds anew on known instruments with known techniques.

The trick involved in capturing such ephemeral phenomena is the conversion of time information into spatial information. a simple device which does this is the chart-recorder, where a needle traces a graph of some time-varying quantity on a regularly rotating drum. (See Diagram 2).

And in fact the original phonograph recorder used exactly this principle, first converting the movement of air into the similar (analogue) movements of a tiny needle, and then using this needle to scratch a pattern on a regularly rotating drum. In this way, a pattern of pressure in time is converted to a physical shape in space. The intrinsically ephemeral had been captured in a physical medium.

This process of creating a spatial analogue of a temporal event was at the root of all sound-recording before the arrival of the computer and is still an essential part of the chain in the capture of the phenomenon of sound. The fundamental idea here is of an analogue. When we work on sound we in fact work on a spatial or electrical or numerical analogue, a very precise copy of the form of the sound-waves in an altogether different medium.

The arrival of electrical power contributed greatly to the evolution of an Art of Sound itself. First of all, reliable electric motors ensured that the time-varying wave could be captured and reproduced reliably, as the rotating devices used could be guaranteed to run at a constant speed. More importantly, electricity itself proved to be the ideal medium in which to create an analogue of the air pressure-waves. Sound waves may be converted into electrical waves by a microphone or other transducer. Electrical waves are variations of electrical voltage with time - analogues of sound waves.

Such electrical analogues may also be created using electrical oscillators, in an (analogue) synthesizer.  Such electrical patterns are, however, equally ephemeral. They must still be converted into a spatial analogue in some physical medium if we are to hold and manipulate sound-phenomena out of time. In the past this might be the shape of a groove in rigid plastic (vinyl discs) or, the variation of magnetism along a tape (analogue tape recorder). By running the physical substance past a pickup (the needle of a record player, the head of a tape recorder) at a regular speed, the position information was reconverted to temporal information and the electrical wave was recreated. The final link in the chain is a device to convert electrical waves back into sound waves. This is the loudspeaker. (See Diagram 3).

Note that in all these cases we are attempting to preserve the shape, the form, of the original pressure wave, though in an entirely different medium.

The digital representation of sound takes one further step which gives us ultimate and precise control over the very substance of these ephemeral phenomena. Using a device known as an A to D (analogue to digital) converter, the pattern of electrical fluctuation is converted into a pattern of numbers. (See Appendix p1). The individual numbers are known as samples (not to be confused with chunks of recorded sounds, recorded in digital samplers, also often referred to as 'samples'), and each one represents the instantaneous (almost!) value of the pressure in the original air pressure wave.
<page>14</page>
