
THE STRUCTURAL FUNCTION OF INTERPOLATION
It is instructive to examine the form of some sound composition phrases to illustrate this
multi-dimensional approach. The sound examples here are taken from Tongues of Fire (1992-94). In
Sound Example 13.1 we begin with a vocal sound whose tail is spectrally time-stretched with a gentle
tremolo at its end. The prior context is that of voice sounds, Voice sounds themselves are only
recognisable as such through a complex interaction of properties (pitch-tessitura, pitch-glide speed
and range, formant and formant-glide set, noise types, general rate and semi-regularity of sequencing
etc.).
After the first downward portamento we arrive at a section based on variants of this time-stretched
voice-tail. Here the sliding inharmonic sound falls or rises or is vibrato or tremolo articulated in
numerous ways. Each event in this segment begins vocally, but the spectrally time-stretched tail
extensions are linked through their (time-evolving) spectral type; pitch and loudness are the principle
articulating parameters.
This leads us to a varied recapitulation of the falling portamento with tremolando idea, but now the
loudness trajectory of the tremolando cuts so deep that the originally continuous sound breaks into a
succession of wood-like onsets. This is a sonic modulation from voice to 'wood' and is akin to a key
change in the tonal system. However, this is only a passing modulation. We switch back again into a
section of variants on the time-stretched tail of the vocal sound.
This section ends with a true sonic modulation, the ritardandoing wood events firmly establishing a new
sonic area, no longer vocal, but 'wood-like'. It is interrupted by a surprising shift back towards the
voice-tail, but, in fact this octave stacked, onset-enveloped version of the tail occurs without the vocal
initiator, thus underlining the sonic "key change" which has taken place. As this event clears, the
wood-like events rise in pitch and density, establishing a high granular texture. The voice has now
been left behind. We are in a new sonic "key".
This sense of elsewhere is reinforced by a further pair of passing sonic modulations, as an accelerating
wood-event (twice) transforms into a drum-like attack, itself colored by a very high frequency version
of the granular texture, adding a cymbal-like presence to these onsets.
The section ends with yet another surprising sound-modulation as the vocal onset returns but (out of a
set of other transforms) goes over into a sound like random vocal grit.
In my description of this event 1 have tried to emphasise the structural importance of sonority by
comparing it to tonal structure. 1 am also stressing the structural function of interpolation as a
continuum-domain analogue of tonal modulation. There are clearly important differences. The set of
keys in the tonal system form a finite, discrete and cyclic set of possibilities (see On Sonic Art) and the
tonal system is rooted in this underlying structure. The Sonic Continuum is neither discrete nor cyclic -
but, by contrast, it is wonderfully multi-dimensional, and we still retain some sense of the 'distance' of
one sound from another even if we cannot measure this in the way we can measure the distance around
the cycle of fifths (see also the discussion of measured, comparative and textural perception in Chapter
9).
105