The first significant object from a musical point of view is a shape made out of samples, and in particular a wavecycle (a single wavelength of a sound). These may be regarded as the atomic units of sound.  The shape and duration of the wavecycle will help to determine the properties (the spectrum and pitch) of the sound of which it is a part. But a single wavecycle is not sufficient on its own to determine these properties. As pitch depends on frequency, the number of times per second a waveform is repeated, a single wavecycle supplies no frequency information. Not until we have about six wavecycles do we begin to associate a specific pitch with the sound. Hence there is a crucial perceptual boundary below which sounds appear as more or less undifferentiated clicks, regardless of their internal form, and above which we begin to assign specific properties (frequency, pitch/noise, spectrum etc) to the sound (for a fuller discussion of this point see On Sonic Art).

This perceptual boundary is nicely illustrated by the process of waveset time-stretching. This process lengthens a sound by repeating each waveset (A waveset is akin to a wavecycle, but not exactly the same thing, For more details see Appendix p55). With noisy sources, the wavesets vary widely from one to another but we hear only the net result, a sound of indefinite pitch. Repeating each waveset lengthens the sound and introduces some artefacts. If we repeat each waveset five or six times however, each one is present long enough to establish a specific pitch and spectral quality and the original source begins to transform into a rapid stream of pitched beads. (Sound example 1.0).

Once we can perceive distinctive qualitative characteristics in a sound, we have a grain. The boundary between the wavecycle time frame and the grain time-frame is of great importance in instrument design. For example, imagine we wished to separate the grains in a sound (like a rolled "R") by examining the loudness trajectory of the sound. Intuitively we can say that the grains are the loud part of the signal, and the points between grains the quietest parts. If we set up an instrument which waits for the signal level to drop below a certain value (a threshold) and then cuts out the sound (gating), we should be able to separate the individual grains.

However, on reflection, we see that this procedure will not work. The instantaneous level of a sound signal constantly varies from positive to negative so, at least twice in every wavecycle, it will fall below the threshold and our procedure will chop the signal into its constituent half wavecycles or smaller units (see Diagram 4) - not what we intended. What we must ask the instrument to do is search for a point in the signal where the signal stays below the (absolute) gate value for a significant length of time.  This time is at least of grain time-frame proportions. (See Diagram 5).

A Grain differs from any larger structure in that we cannot perceive any resolvable internal structure.  The sound presents itself to us as an indivisible unit with definite qualities such as pitch, spectral contour, onset characteristics (hard-edged, soft-edged), pitchy/noisy/gritty quality etc. Often the grain is characterised by a unique cluster of properties which we would be hard pressed to classify individually but which enables us to group it in a particular type e.g. unvoiced "k", "t", "p", "d".

Similarly, the spectral and pitch characteristics may not be easy to pin down, e.g. certain drums have a focused spectrum which we would expect from a pitched sound (they definitely don't have noise spectra as in a hi-hat), yet no particular pitch may be discernible. Analysis of such sounds may reveal either a very short inharmonic spectrum (which has insufficient time to register as several pitches, as we might hear out in an inharmonic bell sound), or a rapidly portamentoing pitched spectrum. Although the internal structure of such sounds is the cause of what we hear, we do not resolve this internal structure in our perception. The experience of a grain is indivisible.
<page>17</page>
