<page id = 42>
will be tied to the morphology (time changing characteristics) of the original sound. Hence the resulting sound will be clearly related to the source in a way which may be musically useful. As this process destroys the original form of the wave I will refer to it as destructive distortion. The following manipulations suggest themselves.

We may replace wavesets with a waveform of a different shape but the same amplitude (waveset substitution : Appendix p52). Thus we may convert all the wavesets to square waves, triangular waves, sine-waves, or even user-defined waveforms. Superficially, one might expect that sine-wave replacement would in some way simplify, or clarify, the spectrum. Again, this may be true with simple sound input but complex sounds are just changed in spectral "feel" as a rapidly changing sine-wave is no less perceptually chaotic than a rapidly changing arbitrary wave-shape. In the sound examples the sound with a wood-like attack has wavesets replaced by square waves, and then by sine waves. Two interpolating sequences (see Chapter 12) between the 'wood' and each of the transformed sounds is then created by inbetweening (see Appendix p46 & Chapter 12). (Sound example 3.27).

Inverting the half-wave-cycles (waveset inversion: Appendix p51) usually produces an "edge" to the spectral characteristics of the sound. We might also change the spectrum by applying a power factor to the waveform shape itself (waveset distortion: Appendix p52) (Sound example 3.28).

We may average the waveset shape over N wavesets (waveset averaging). Although this process appears to be similar to the process of spectral blurring, it is in fact quite irrational, averaging the waveset length and the wave shape (and hence the resulting spectral contour) in perceptually unpredictable way. More interesting (though apparently less promising) we may replace N in every M wavesets by silence (waveset omission : Appendix p51). For example, every alternate waveset may be replaced by silence. Superficially, this would appear to be an unpromising approach but we are in fact thus changing the waveform. Again, this process introduces a slightly rasping "edge" to the sound quality of the source sound which increases as more "silence" is introduced. (Sound example 3.29).

We may add 'harmonic components' to the waveset in any desired proportions (waveset harmonic distortion) by making copies of the waveset which are 1/2 as short (1/3 as short etc) and superimposing 2 (3) of these on the original waveform in any specified amplitude weighting. With an elementary waveset form this adds harmonics in a rational and predictable way. With a complex waveform, it enriches the spectrum in a not wholly predictable way, though we can fairly well predict how the spectral energy will be redistributed. (Appendix p52).

We may also rearrange wavesets in any specified way (waveset shuffling : Appendix p51) or reverse wavesets or groups of N wavesets (waveset reversal Appendix p51). Again, where N is large we produce a fairly predictable brassage of reverse segments, but with smaller values of N the signal is altered in subtle ways. Values of N at the threshold of grain perceptibility are especially interesting.  Finally, we may introduce small, random changes to the wavesct lengths in the signal (waveset shaking : Appendix p51). This has the effect of adding "roughness" to clearly pitched sounds.

Such distortion procedures work particularly well with short sounds having distinctive loudness trajectories. In the sound example a set of such sounds, suggesting a bouncing object, is destructively distorted in various ways, suggesting a change in the physical medium in which the 'bouncing' takes place (e.g. bouncing in sand). (Sound example 3.30).
</page>
