<page id=30>
The ideal way, therefore, to change the pitch of the sound is to build a synthetic model of the sound, then alter its fundamental frequency. However this is a very complicated task, and adopting this approach for every sound we use, would make sound composition unbelievable arduous. So we must find alternative approaches.

DIFFERENT APPROACHES TO PITCH-CHANGING

In the time-domain, the obvious way to change the pitch is to change the wavelength of the sound. In classical tape studios the only way to do this was to speed up (or slow down) the tape. On the computer, we simply re-read the digital data at a different step (instead of every one sample, read every 2 samples, or every 1.3 samples). This is tape-speed variation. This automatically makes every wavelength shorter (or longer) and changes the pitch. Unfortunately, it also makes the source sound shorter (longer). If this doesn't matter, it's the simplest method to adopt, but with segmented sounds (speech, melodies) or moving sounds (e.g. portamenti) it changes their perceived speed. (Sound example 2.9).

Computer control makes such "tape-speed" variation a more powerful tool as we can precisely control the speed change trajectory or specify a speed-change in terms of its final velocity (tape acceleration).  The availability of time-variable processing gives us a new order of compositional control of such time-varying processes. (Sound example 2.10).

Waveset transposition is an unconventional approach which avoids the time-distortion involved in tape-speed variation and can be used for integral multiples of the frequency. Here, each waveset (in the sense of a pair of zero-crossings : Appendix p50) is replaced by N shortened copies occupying the same time as the original one. (Diagram 3 and Appendix p51). This technique is very fast to compute but often introduces strange, signal dependent (i.e. varying with the signal) artefacts. (It can therefore be used as a process of constructive distortion in its own right!) Grouping the wavesets in pairs, triplets etc., before reproducing them, can affect the integrity of reproduction of the sound at the new pitch (see Diagram 4). The grouping to choose again depends on the signal.

With accurate pitch-tracking this technique can be applied to true wavecycles (deduced from a knowledge of both the true wavelength and the zero-crossing information) and should avoid producing artefacts. (Diagram 5).

The technique can also be used to transpose the sound downwards, replacing N wavesets or wavecycles by just one of them, enlarged, but too much information may be lost (especially in a complex sound) to give a satisfactory result in terms of just pitch- shifting. (Appendix p51 : Sound example 2.11a).

A more satisfactory time-domain approach is through brassage. To lower the pitch of the sound, we cut the sound into short segments, slow them down as in tape-speed variation, which lengthens them, then splice them together again so they overlap sufficiently to retain the original duration. It is crucial to use segments in the grain time-frame (see Chapters 1 & 4), so that each segment is long enough to carry instantaneous pitch information, but not long enough to have a perceptible internal structure which would lead to unwanted echo effects within the pitch-changed sound. This technique, used in the harmoniser, works quite well over a range of one octave, up or down, but beyond this, begins to introduce significant artefacts: the signal is transformed as well as pitch-shifted. (Sound example 2.12).
</page>
