<page id=26>
what it hears. The odd harmonics, say 300, 500, 700, 900, will continue to imply a fundamental of 100 cycles but will take on a clarinet type quality (clarinets produce only the odd harmonics in the spectrum) and move into one of the loudspeakers. The remaining harmonics, 200, 400, 600, 800, will be interpreted as having a fundamental at 200 (as 200 is the HCF of 200, 400, 600 and 800) and hence a second "voice" an octave higher, will appear to emanate from the other loudspeaker. Hence, with no change of spectral content, we have generated 2 pitch percepts from a single pitch percept. (Sound example 2.2).

SPECTRAL AND HARMONIC CONCEPTIONS OF PITCH

Our definition of pitch leads us into conflict both with traditional conceptions and traditional terminology.  First of all, to say that a spectrum is harmonic, is to say that the partials are exact multiples of the fundamental and this is the source of the perceptual fusion. Once this exact relationship is disturbed, this spectral fusion is disturbed (see next Chapter).

There are not different kinds of harmony in the spectrum. Most of the relationships we deal with between pitches in traditional Western "harmony" are between frequencies that do not stand in this simple relationship to one another (because our scale is tempered). They are approximations to whole number ratios which "work" in the functional context of Western harmonic musical language. But, more importantly, they are relationships between the averaged properties of sounds. An "A" and a "C" played on two flutes (or on one piano) are two distinct sound events, each having its own integrated spectrum. Each spectrum is integrated with itself because its internal microfluctuations run in parallel over all its own partials. But these microfluctuations are different to those in the other spectrum.  Within a single spectrum, however, partials might roughly correspond to an A and a C (but in exact numerical proportions, unlike in the tempered scale) but will also have exactly parallel microfluctuations and hence fuse in our unitary perception of a much lower fundamental (e.g. an F 2 octaves below). We can draw analogies between these two domains (as some composers have done) but they are perceptually quite distinct.

To avoid confusion, we will try to reserve the words "HArmony" and "HArmonic" (capitalised as shown) to apply to the traditional concern with relations amongst notes in Western art music and we will refer to a spectrum having pitch as a pitch-spectrum or as having harmonicity, rather than as a harmonic spectrum (which is the preferred scientific description). However, the term "harmonic" may occasionally be used in the spectral sense as a contrasting term to "inharmonic".

A second problem arises because a spectrum in motion may still preserve this simple relationship between its constituent partials, as it moves. To put it simply, a portamento is pitched in the spectral sense. It is difficult to speak of a portamento as "having a pitch" in the sense of conventional harmony.  This sense of "having a pitch" i.e. being able to assign a pitch to a specific class like E-flat or C#2 is quite a different concept from the timbral concept of pitch described here. We will therefore refer to that traditional concept as Hpitch, an abbreviation for pitch-as-related-to-conventional-harmony.

Perception of Hpitch depends on the existence of a frame of reference (see Chapter 1). Even with steady (non-portamento) pitches, we may still have no sense of Hpitch if the pitches are selected at random from the continuum of values, though often our cultural predispositions cause us to "force" the notes onto our preconceived notion of where they "ought" to be. In the sound example we hear first a set of truly random pitches, next a set of pitches on a HArmonic field, then a set of pitches approximable to a HArmonic field and finally the 'same' set locked onto that HArmonic field. (Sound example 2.3).
</page>
