HArmony in European music. Thus we use double capitalisation for the latter, and none for the former.  (For a fuller discussion, see Chapter 2). The bell spectrum, in contrast, is known as an inharmonic spectrum.

It is important to note that this new representation of sound is out-of-time. We have converted the temporal information in our original representation to frequency information in our new representation.

These two representations of sound are known as the time-domain representation and the frequency-domain representation respectively. The mathematical technique which allows us to convert from one to the other is known as the Fourier transform (and to convert back again, the inverse Fourier transform) which is often implemented on computers in a highly efficient algorithm called the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT).

If we now wish to represent the spectrum of a sound which varies in time (i.e. any sound of musical interest and certainly any naturally occurring sound) we must divide the sound into tiny time-snapshots (like the frames of a film) known as windows. A sequence of these windows will show us how the spectrum evolves with time (the phase vocoder does just this, see Appendix p11).

Note also that a very tiny fragment of the time-domain representation ( a fragment shorter than a wavecycle), although it gives us accurate information about the time-variation of the pressure wave, gives us no information about frequency. Converting it to frequency data with the FFT will produce energy all over the spectrum. Listening to it we will hear only a click (whatever the source).  Conversely, the frequency domain representation gives us more precise information about the frequency of the partials in a sound the larger the time window used to calculate it. But in enlarging the window, we track less accurately how the sound changes in time. This trade-off between temporal information and frequency information is identical to the quantum mechanical principle of indeterminacy, where the time and energy (or position and momentum) of a particle/wave cannot both be known with accuracy - we trade off our knowledge of one against our knowledge of the other.

TIME FRAMES : SAMPLES, WAVE-CYCLES, GRAINS AND CONTINUATIONS

In working with sound materials, we quickly become aware of the different time-frames involved and their perceptual consequences. Stockhausen, in the article How Time Passes (published in Die Reihe) argued for the unity of formal, rhythmic and acoustic time-frames as the rationale for his composition Gruppen. This was a fruitful stance to adopt as far as Gruppen was concerned and fits well with the "unity" mysticism which pervades much musical score analysis and commentary, but it does not tally with aural experience.

Extremely short time frames of the order of 0.0001 seconds have no perceptual significance at all. Each sample in the digital representation of a waveform corresponds to a time less than 0.0001 seconds.  Although every digitally recorded sound is made out of nothing but samples, the individual sample can tell us nothing about the sound of which it is a part. Each sample, if heard individually, would be a broad-band click of a certain loudness. Samples are akin to the quarks of subatomic particle theory, essential to the existence and structure of matter, but not separable from the particles (protons and neutrons) they constitute.
<page>16</page>
